So I was saying, my name is Kim, for the people in the stream who missed that,
I'm a data scientist for the Dutch Healthcare Authority or NZA. We are a regulator in the
healthcare domain and today I'm going to talk a little bit about how we made our healthcare
regulation a bit more shiny by making a dashboard which is modular and has layout-as-code so we can
accommodate different types of users and be compliant with privacy law and be developer
friendly as well. Lots of promises. So first, if you think about healthcare regulation you
need to think a bit about healthcare systems and they have a tendency to be very differently for
different countries but we don't have the time to dive into that too deeply. So let's simplify
things a lot and have a look at conflicting ideals. So basically any healthcare system boils down to
these three ideals. So we want basically good and cheap healthcare whenever we need it, right? So
we have the affordability, availability and quality of healthcare. Unfortunately it's actually quite
impossible to have all three of these ideals. So there's always a trade-off between them. And
at the Dutch Healthcare Authority we are often looking at this impossible triangle through a
more economic lens. So as you know healthcare often boils down to money. It does. So things
that we are on the lookout for are things like fraud or misuse of healthcare funds,
unexpected bankruptcies, things like that. And we use data and dashboarding to monitor this and
intervene where necessary. But to reintroduce a little bit of complexity because this really is
too simple, we are not the only regulator in the Netherlands that deals with healthcare. So the
landscape looks more like this. So we are somewhere in there and actually there are more than this
because some of the regulating tasks are on the municipal level. So basically any municipality
has regulating tasks. And as you can see all of these regulators are basically optimizing for
the same problem, right? Again the good and cheap healthcare whenever we need it. Yeah, so same
problem. Mostly the same data and mostly the same needs in terms of dashboarding, which is why we
decided at some point to build a shiny dashboard. We are in the shiny session after all. And share
that with other regulators. So the three organizations over there came together and
decided to build a shiny dashboard. And then the idea was to share that with as many other regulators
as possible. That worked out pretty nicely until this happened. So turned out we were sharing data
with regulators that we were not allowed to share. Because all of these regulators have
different laws, different jurisdictions, making things really, really complicated. And what we
were doing was technically not allowed. Yeah, so we weren't allowed to continue with that. So we
had to decide either build a different dashboard for each different type of user, which is horrible,
or yeah, kick people off the platform, which is also horrible. But that's what we did. So we kicked
a lot of users out and only the ones that we were actually allowed to share the whole dashboard with
stayed on. But yeah, that kind of defeated the purpose of the dashboard because we wanted to
share healthcare information with all the other regulators, right? So we had to go back to the
drawing board and come up with something better, which is where the modular design comes in. So we
thought, well, if we cannot share the whole dashboard or the dashboard as a whole, why not
just cut it up into pieces? And then for each of the pieces, or let's say modules, we can decide
with whom we can share that. So that should give us enough control to be compliant with the privacy
law. So it would look something like this. You have groups of modules and groups of users based
on the sensitivity of the data and based on the different laws and who gets access to what. And
then it's a matter of just mapping these two groups. So managing user access and GDPR
compliancy was the main reason to go with a modular setup. The second has to do with spaghetti
and waffles. Yeah, that's unexpected. That's to get your attention back. Very good. Spaghetti and
waffles. We'll get there. First, I'd like to see a show of hands. Who knows what Shiny modules are?
Oh, pretty good. Who actually uses them? Not bad. All right. Nice. So as you all know, most likely
a Shiny app has a user interface and a server function. And as your app becomes larger,
especially that server function has a tendency to grow and grow and grow and becomes like thousands
of lines long and very hard to manage and debug. And the awesome mechanism of reactivity can grow
a bit out of hand so that if you change something over there, something over there might break. And
that's completely unexpected and it can become a bit of a nightmare. The nightmare being like
spaghetti. So that's how your code kind of looks like. You tug on one piece and on the other hand
of the plate, things might break. And our code was a bit like that. Our initial dashboard that
we weren't allowed to share anymore. It kind of looked internally like this. So when we sort of
were forced to do a redesign anyway, well, let's fix that as well. So that's the secondary reason.
And what we wanted would look more like that. Like a waffle. A nicely baked waffle. It's super
structured. It has these nice squares and you know exactly what goes where. It's awesome. Yeah. So
Shiny modules are a bit like that. So you break up your app into smaller pieces and the main app
calls the various modules and the modules can call even other modules if you want. So everything is
nicely organized. All right. So this is what we wanted. So next here is a screenshot of our
dashboard. It's fully in Dutch. Don't try to read it. You might get a headache. It's just here to
show the outline of how we use modules to structure the thing. So on the top level, you see on the
left-hand side, there are a bunch of pages. And pages are the top level module here. So this is
the content of a page. And basically the dashboard consists of a bunch of them. And every page then
consists of tiles. These blocks inside a page. And every tile can contain an actual content
module, let's say. In this case, there are two. And you see with tabs you can switch between them.
So the whole setup, let's say, of the modular system is that you have a generic module for a
page, generic module for a tile, and they are reused for all of them. And then there are more
specific modules for the actual content, right? You can reuse them, but, you know, they're a bit
more specific. So with this setup, we could actually link that to access control and decide
who gets to see what. But we also had to do something about the layout of the dashboard.
Because if you imagine you have the same layout for all of your users, but some of the modules
are not accessible, either you log in and you see a giant access denied message in certain places on
your page, or maybe there are these giant gaping holes where apparently there was a module, but
you're not allowed to see it. Also not very nice. So we had to kind of design layouts for the
different user groups that we had. And you can hard code that, of course, in Shiny, but it's way
nicer, I think, to define it in a separate way. So we went the JSON route and used a JSON file to
define the layouts of the various variants of the dashboard, let's say. So it would look a bit like
this. Again, the same page of the dashboard. And then on the left hand, you see the JSON that we
use to define what you see. So the top level, again, is the page. And the page has a couple of
fields. You see a title and an icon, stuff like that. But there is also a field called modules.
And basically, that says which tiles are inside this page. So if I go over there, expand that. So
in the modules field, there is an array of modules of the tile type, let's say. And inside that,
again, there is a modules field. And that defines the actual content modules inside. So there's a
hierarchical structure there. So if the app is starting up, it doesn't yet know what modules go
where. It just has a JSON file and a bunch of Shiny modules that it can load up. And this JSON file,
as you saw, contains an array of page objects, really. So we can split that up. And from each of
those chunks, a page module is instantiated, which has a modules field, which is an array of modules.
And then from that, you can instantiate the tiles. And every tile, again, has a bit of the JSON,
the original JSON file, and can start up the content modules. All right. So that worked pretty
nicely. The only thing that was still missing, well, only a major thing that was still missing,
let's say it like that, is communication between these modules. If you ever use Shiny modules,
then you know that communicating between modules can be a bit of a pain. But if you don't know what
other modules there will even be on a page, how do you communicate with them? I mean, you don't even
know if they exist yet. Yeah, that was an issue. To solve that, here is an example of two modules,
let's say a search module and a graph module that need to communicate. And to solve this,
we basically double down on the JSON approach. So the search module exports a variable,
which is defined in the JSON. So it has an exports field. And the graph module then imports
a certain variable. In this case, it imports the org ID variable. And that is mapped to the selected
ID variable of the other module using a path. You see it finds the selected ID on page one,
tile one in the search module. So on the R side, it will look like this. If you recall,
every module has a UI and a server function. And because it is a function, it has inputs and
outputs, which we can use to inject basically the information that we need to get this working.
So if we start by the outputs, that's a bit easier. So if in your R code for the search
function, you return basically the ID that a user selects, then another module can import that
via the inputs and make it work. Why does it work? Well, these two are reactive values,
which helps a lot because reactive values are under the hood, like R6 objects, and they are
passed by reference, not by value. So if the module starts, you don't get a copy of selected
ID at that moment, but you get a reference to the actual variable selected ID inside the other
module. So when graph module is running, it actually has sort of a pointer to the original
selected ID variable inside the other module. So as soon as someone selects a different,
let's say healthcare provider, then reactively things in the graph module will start recomputing
because they are reactively linked, like everything should be in a shiny app.
All right. Well, with that problem solved, we decided to go one step further. Not that our
users asked for it, but it was just too cool not to do, basically, which is to build in a
customization option at runtime, because all of these modules are basically loaded at runtime,
not at design or coding time. So we could do something like this. Here is a bit of an animation.
So a user can use the side panel and just add the tiles. They can add new modules, which are
reactively linked to the ones that are already on the page. Automatically, they can remove modules
if they want, resize or drag and drop a bit, just to make it work with their personal workflow.
And because we have this JSON file backing all of this up, all of these changes that the user
makes are saved to the JSON, so next time someone logs in, you see exactly how you left it last
time, and you can just use it however you want to use it. So in this way, we can let people
personalize their dashboard. Funny thing, no one asked for it, and almost no one uses it, but it's
you know, it's nice. So this JSON file that we started out with was different per user group,
so we had the nice layouts, but in the end, it's actually a personal JSON. So every user who has
an account on the dashboard has its own personal JSON definition of their own personal dashboard,
basically. All right, so currently, we have a couple hundreds of users on our dashboard
from a lot of different organizations in the Netherlands, and instead of the take-it-or-leave-it
approach that we have, now we can just say, well, you get that part of the dashboard,
you get that module, and people can customize even if they really want to, and make the dashboard fit
with their own workflow. And the current dashboard has a lot more content already than the old one
ever had, but because of this modular setup, it's actually easier to maintain still, which is very
helpful. And because we put in most of the, let's say, the complex part of the coding in the generic
modules, like the page and the tile, the actual content modules are pretty clean. So for new team
members that join our project, it's actually relatively easy to just start to contribute.
It's relatively straightforward to just create a new module, and it will sort of automagically
fit within the framework and can be used. So if you have a large, shiny dashboard that needs to
show different things for different groups of users, or you want to make it customizable,
well, you can do that with Shiny modules. And if you want to know more, I did do a
R6-based rewrite of this whole framework. It's a bit different than what I showed you,
because it's, well, it doesn't have all the healthcare regulation-specific stuff in there,
which we are not allowed to share, obviously. But I think it's interesting, and it has the layout
as code part implemented in it, so you can check that out. There's also a link if you want to know
more about what we do as a healthcare regulator. And yeah, I think there's room for a question,
maybe one or two, because, yeah, that's it. I'm done. Thanks.
All right. Yes, I was waiting for the thank you word. All right, so we have a couple of questions.
The first one is, they want to know how to add security to a Shiny app, as in embedding
the email addresses of the users only, so that if anyone accidentally has access to the link but
not part of the users, they will not be able to use it. Yeah, so for this particular dashboard,
we built our own login system, so people log in on the actual dashboard, so that way we know
who is who, basically, and then those accounts are linked to user groups, and based on the user
group, we know what kind of modules you're allowed to access. Yeah, I think that answers the question,
I hope. How are you storing multiple JSON files for each user in the file folder structure of
the application? Oh, that's a good question, yeah. So we use a Postgres database backing
up this dashboard, so all of the user accounts and information like that is all in the Postgres
database, and Postgres has magnificent support for JSON, so that was the way to go for us.
The dashboard itself is on Positive Connect, and then there is a Postgres database behind that.
Last question, how many people do you have working on the application? Can you talk a bit about your
team development approach? We have about four developers for the last year or two, I think,
working on this. Yeah, we work in an agile way with sprints, et cetera, the whole shebang.